---
layout: post
title: "ORM in Lua"
description: ""
category: 
tags: []
---
{% include JB/setup %}

### ORM in Lua

ORM stands for Object Relational Mapping, a typical buzzword used when a programmer decides to store data in a relational database
without explicitly writing SQL in the code for doing so.  Every language has several libraries that help you with this.  The first
product that I can remember that made use of this was something called Toplink, which Oracle now owns.  In Java there's Hibernate,
Python has Datamapper, Ruby has ActiveRecord, ... but what does Lua have?

### Enter Corona

I've been using [Corona](http://www.coronalabs.com) recently because it's an easy to use framework for building 2D game-like 
applications for the mobile phone or tablet.  However, one may require an ORM if they have many stateful models.  The closest thing
to an ORM that I could find was something called [lua-CoatPersistent](http://fperrad.github.com/lua-CoatPersistent/).  In the
example below, I'll briefly describe how I used it, and additional modifications that may be necessary when running in the Corona
environment.

Coat is a Lua library ported from the Perl world that mimics a class system so one can add instance methods to objects easily.  The
CoatPersistent library uses Coat for defining object instances that are capable of saving themselves to the database.

### Modifications in Persistent.lua

First, we'll have to do some brief modifications in Persistent.lua because it was originally engineered for mysql & postgresql, both
of which are not available on mobile phones & tablets.  We're modifying it here to make use of sqlite as the target database.  The
sqlite driver is provided by Corona.

    local function establish_connection (class, driver, path)
        drv[class] = driver
        local conn = cnx[driver]
        if not conn then
            env = require "sqlite3"
            if not env then
                error("cannot create an environment for " .. driver)
            end
            local msg
            conn = env.open(path)
            cnx[driver] = conn
        end
        return conn
    end
    _M.establish_connection = establish_connection


### Example

In this short example, we'll create a pet, and save it to the database.  First, we'll have to define the Pet schema and any methods
we might want to add to the pet model:

    require 'Coat.Persistent'

    local json = require 'json'
    local util = require 'util'

    persistent 'Pet'

    has_p.name = { is = 'rw', isa = 'string' }
    has_p.species = { is = 'rw', isa = 'string' }

    sql_create = [[
        CREATE TABLE pet (
            id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
            name CHAR(128),
            species CHAR(128)
        )
    ]]
    
    function method:eat()
      print("I am eating!")
    end

    local path = system.pathForFile("orm.db", system.DocumentsDirectory)

    local conn = Pet.establish_connection('sqlite3', path)
    conn:execute(Pet.sql_create)

Creating & saving the model to the database is quite easy.  One only needs to do something like this:

    doggy = Pet.create {name = "happy", species = "dog"}
    doggy:save()

Querying for the model is also quite simple as well:

    iterator = Pet.find("id = " .. id)
    doggy = iterator()

Keep in mind that when you perform a query, an iterator function is returned where you can keep calling it
to get the next item in the result set.
